Folate and long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acid supplementation during pregnancy has long-term effects on the attention system of 8.5-y-old offspring: a randomized controlled trial.
BACKGROUND: During fetal and perinatal periods, many nutrients, such as long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids [contained in fish oil (FO)] and folate, are important in achieving normal brain development. Several studies have shown the benefits of early nutrition on children's neurocognitive development. However, the evidence with regard to the attention system is scarce. OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to analyze the long-term effects of FO, 5-methyltetrahydrofolate (5-MTHF), or FO+5-MTHF prenatal supplementation on attention networks. DESIGN: Participants were 136 children born to mothers from the NUHEAL (Nutraceuticals for a Healthy Life) project (randomly assigned to receive FO and/or 5-MTHF or placebo prenatal supplementation) who were recalled for a new examination 8.5 y later. The response conflict-resolution ability (using congruent and incongruent conditions)), alerting, and spatial orienting of attention were evaluated with behavioral measures (Attention Network Test), electroencephalography/event-related potentials (ERPs), and standardized low-resolution brain electromagnetic tomography (sLORETA). RESULTS: Children born to mothers supplemented with 5-MTHF alone solved the response conflict more quickly than did the placebo and the FO+5-MTHF groups (all P < 0.05). Differences between ERP amplitudes for the conflict conditions were also observed. sLORETA analysis showed higher activation of the right midcingulate cortex for the incongruent condition. In addition, a significant slowing down of response speed depending on the warning cue in the 5-MTHF and FO groups was observed. CONCLUSIONS: Folate supplementation during pregnancy, rather than FO or FO+5-MTHF supplementation, improves children's ability to solve response conflicts. This advantage seems to be based on the higher activation of the midcingulate cortex, indicating that early nutrition influences the functionality of specific brain areas involved in executive functions. This trial was registered at clinicaltrials.gov as NCT01180933.